Welcome to practical time series analysis.
Time series and their mathematical models,
so called stochastic processes,
form a really vibrant
rich areas of study and
research as well as being an area
of real practical significance.
So if you're a mathematician and
you want to study elegance,
then this is a nice course for you.
You can get a good introduction
into stochastic processes.
But I suspect what's more likely true for
many of the people in this course,
if you're on the job and all of a sudden
you have to look at time series data, and
your mathematical background didn't
include a study of time series or
stochastic processes, this course will
help give you a nice overview, a very
practical approach to where time series
come from and how people manage them.
Let's take a look at what we're
going to study in the course.
We have a few categories here, but really
the list goes on, it's almost endless.
Many people, you can imagine, if you're
looking at temperature data in Melbourne,
Australia or
if you'd like to know about earthquakes,
many people need to deal
with time series data.
Perhaps you have sales figures,
you're looking at stock prices.
It's a very basic object,
measuring a quantity in time and so
it's very natural that many of us
have to deal with time series.
So that was the good news.
This may be the bad news for
some people, but maybe not.
What do you need to be
successful in this course?
We're trying to do a course
which is kind of honest and
looking at the real complexities
involved in time series, but
keeping the mathematical
preliminaries as modest as possible.
So if you have calculus, let's say
calculus two, not so much because
we'll be integrating very much, but we'll
be dealing with sequences and series.
This is very natural,
these are time series,
then calculus would be a real plus.
We're assuming that you've done at least
a little bit of inferential statistics.
You've done a hypothesis test,
you've done some descriptive statistics,
so you can do a box plot,
these sorts of things.
We spent time during the first
week looking at these basics
in some depth, so if it's been a long
time since you've done any statistics,
don't let that be too off putting, come
on in and see if you can be productive.
But we do assume that you
have some background.
Also if you're dealing with time series,
you could be doing this with Excel or
in our course we assume that you
have access to R, which is free,
you download it off the Internet.
We assume that you're and
comfortable in computers, and
that if we ask you to go get
a data set from a website,
that that'll be within your wheel house,
so to speak.
So we're going to be doing
a little bit of programming,
but ours is more a scripting environment.
We're not going to be
writing elaborate codes,
but we will be calling functions
in order to analyze our data.
In the first week then, we get started
in R, we'll figure out how to download
the program, how to install it on your
computer, whether you're on Windows or
Mac, and
how to start working with packages.
We'll go back and review some of the basic
stats you might have to taken in
a stats 100 course at some point.
And in particular we'll look
at regression and correlation.
In the second week we start visualizing
our time series and also doing modelling.
So we like to think about
mathematical models for
time series because we can study
the properties of mathematical models
in a very nice and general way,
and then take our insight and
bring them to bear on the actual time
series that we have in front of us.
We'll deal with autocorrelation and
autocovariance.
This is one of the truly fundamental ideas
in stochastic processes and time series.
And we'll look at some famous examples,
random walks, moving averages.
In the third week, we start dealing
with the concept called Stationarity,
which essentially if we can assume it,
it'll help us to do our modelling
much more efficiently,
much more obviously.
We'll continue to look at examples.
We'll get into a little bit of the
Mathematics with our Backshift Operator,
we'll look at series,
duality, invertibility.
So don't let that be too off putting.
In Week 4,
we continue the modeling process, and
try to think about mathematical objects
that will give rise to time series data.
Much like you can think of a random
variable as modelling the toss of a coin.
So we'll deal with moving average
processes, autoregressive processes,
Yule Walker, we'll study the partial
autocorrelation coefficient,
to try to figure out from a given time
series what the model might have been that
produced it.
Since we are trying to model,
we're trying to write the story
that gives rise to our time series.
We'll deal with model quality.
And there are a number
of ways to measure this.
The Akaike information
criterion being one of them.
We'll look at autoregressive, moving
average, autoregressive moving average,
integrated autoregressive
moving average models.
We'll start thinking about how to put
in trends and seasonality sort of data.
And so in Week 6 you can see
Seasonality takes center stage.
There is a set of ideas that
were developed in the 1950s,
but people still find really,
really useful.
Holt and Winters are two names
of famous mathematicians
that you'll see associated with this,
where we can start doing forecasting.
Based upon past data, can we start making
some good guesses about what we're
going to see next week,
next month or next year?
And so we get into the single,
double and triple exponential smoothing.
We hope you enjoy the course, and welcome.